[Ready for Review] new chapter:  Practical Techniques for Effective Public Speaking (#4030)
the-turing-way/the-turing-way: book/website/communication/presentations/public-speaking-tips.md

Striking the right balance ensures you’re not just heard, but truly remembered.

Ask yourself:

**Resonance:** How does my talk appeal to the audience’s emotions?

- Speak to the **heart**. Relate to your audience on an emotional level.

**Relevance:** Is my content practical and suited to their needs?

- Speak to the **head**. Share information that’s meaningful, accurate, and on point.

Balance these two, and you’ll have your audience engaged from start to finish.

## Finding the Right Pace
Ever noticed how a pendulum swings? Left, right, left, right — it’s rhythmic but predictable. 
As speakers, we risk losing our audience if we’re too slow or overwhelming them if we’re too fast.

Pacing can be an art:

- **Go slow** at strategic moments to let your audience process key ideas.
- **Pick up the pace** when covering familiar or less critical details.
- **Modulate** — don’t stick to one rhythm. Alternate rhythms to keep things lively — don’t settle into a monotone “pendulum swing.”

Bonus tip: Use pauses strategically. 
They’re like a mental exhale for your audience.

> If you use slides (which are NOT _required_ for effective public speaking!), blank slides can act as visual pauses, too!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you use slides (which are NOT _required_ for effective public speaking!), blank slides can act as visual pauses, too!

```

Reviewer: Just a spacing suggestion!

Bonus tip: Follow it up with a quick one-liner that subtly leads the audience toward the point you’re making.

For instance: “Wouldn’t it be great if coffee was free for a day? (*pause*) Yeah, I thought so too.”

## Storytelling: The Secret Weapon/More Than Words
Stories aren’t just for entertainment — they’re a bridge to connect with your audience on a personal level.

Personal experiences, when shared within appropriate boundaries, create a sense of familiarity and even intimacy. 
Using metaphors or idioms adds color and paints vivid mental pictures that keep listeners invested and engaged.

## Keep Them Guessing
Embrace the element of surprise. Add something unexpected to your talk — an unconventional approach, a surprising fact, or a playful twist. 
It keeps the audience on their toes and leaves a lasting impression.

## Emphasise new ideas.
Remember: your audience is hearing your material for the first time. 
Don’t gloss over fresh or complex ideas — slow down, articulate clearly, and make them count.

In short, *take your time explaining new ideas so they can fully absorb them*.

> Moreso, if you are introducing something new to the audience, understand what they're familar with and use analogies that connect the new information to their existing knowledge.

Reviewer: Maybe something here about knowing your audience - and the types of topics, content, questions, etc that might resonate with them

# Practical Techniques for Effective Public Speaking (or "A Guide to Impactful Presentations")

> Public speaking, like most other skills, is one you can never truly master, but only strive to refine. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Public speaking, like most other skills, is something you can always strive to refine.
```
To keep the checks happy!

Below are some practical tips that can radically sharpen your public speaking skills. 
Whether you’re preparing for a talk, a webinar, or even a casual presentation, these gems might just transform how you approach your next speaking opportunity.

> ## Resonance and Relevance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Resonance and Relevance

```
I usually tend to leave a blank line after section headings, so

At the core of every talk are two primary goals: to connect emotionally (resonance) and to deliver intellectually (relevance). 
Striking the right balance ensures you’re not just heard, but truly remembered.

Ask yourself:

**Resonance:** How does my talk appeal to the audience’s emotions?

- Speak to the **heart**. Relate to your audience on an emotional level.

**Relevance:** Is my content practical and suited to their needs?

- Speak to the **head**. Share information that’s meaningful, accurate, and on point.

Balance these two, and you’ll have your audience engaged from start to finish.

> ## Finding the Right Pace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Finding the Right Pace

```

Ever noticed how a pendulum swings? Left, right, left, right — it’s rhythmic but predictable. 
As speakers, we risk losing our audience if we’re too slow or overwhelming them if we’re too fast.

Pacing can be an art:

- **Go slow** at strategic moments to let your audience process key ideas.
- **Pick up the pace** when covering familiar or less critical details.
- **Modulate** — don’t stick to one rhythm. Alternate rhythms to keep things lively — don’t settle into a monotone “pendulum swing.”

Bonus tip: Use pauses strategically. 
They’re like a mental exhale for your audience.

If you use slides (which are NOT _required_ for effective public speaking!), blank slides can act as visual pauses, too!

> ## Passion is Contagious

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Passion is Contagious

```

Enthusiasm and confidence are infectious. 
So, if you show genuine excitement about your topic, your audience will mirror it.

Imagine yourself as an audience member: *How would you expect a confident speaker to act?*

Also, reflect on your experiences with effective public speaking. What characteristics and behaviors did those speakers exhibit that demonstrated enthusiasm and confidence? Learn from them.

Bottom line? Own the stage, and don’t be afraid to enjoy the experience.

> ## The Power of Rhetorical Questions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The Power of Rhetorical Questions

```

Want your audience to think deeply? Ask rhetorical questions.

> A well-placed rhetorical question not only grabs attention but also invites the audience to ponder, think critically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A well-placed rhetorical question not only grabs attention but also invites the audience to ponder and think critically.
```

> Bonus tip: Follow it up with a quick one-liner that subtly leads the audience toward the point you’re making.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bonus tip: Follow it up with a quick one-liner that subtly leads the audience towards the point you’re making.
```

For instance: “Wouldn’t it be great if coffee was free for a day? (*pause*) Yeah, I thought so too.”

> ## Storytelling: The Secret Weapon/More Than Words

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Storytelling: The Secret Weapon/More Than Words

```

Stories aren’t just for entertainment — they’re a bridge to connect with your audience on a personal level.

Personal experiences, when shared within appropriate boundaries, create a sense of familiarity and even intimacy. 
Using metaphors or idioms adds color and paints vivid mental pictures that keep listeners invested and engaged.

> ## Keep Them Guessing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Keep Them Guessing

```

Embrace the element of surprise. Add something unexpected to your talk — an unconventional approach, a surprising fact, or a playful twist. 
It keeps the audience on their toes and leaves a lasting impression.

> ## Emphasise new ideas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Emphasise new ideas

```

Remember: your audience is hearing your material for the first time. 
Don’t gloss over fresh or complex ideas — slow down, articulate clearly, and make them count.

In short, *take your time explaining new ideas so they can fully absorb them*.

> Moreso, if you are introducing something new to the audience, understand what they're familar with and use analogies that connect the new information to their existing knowledge.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are introducing something new to the audience, understand what they're familiar with and use analogies that connect the new information to their existing knowledge.
```

> ## It’s Okay to Say “I Don’t Know”

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## It’s Okay to Say “I Don’t Know”

```

When faced with a tough question, honesty is key. 
Acknowledge the person for asking, repeat the question if necessary, and take a moment to process. 
It’s okay to admit you don’t know the answer — it builds trust and shows humility and authenticity.

Bonus tip: Repeating the question back to the audience not only buys time but also makes the asker feel heard and valued.

> ## Lead the Slides; Don’t Let Them Lead You

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Lead the Slides; Don’t Let Them Lead You

```

# Practical Techniques for Effective Public Speaking (or "A Guide to Impactful Presentations")

Public speaking, like most other skills, is one you can never truly master, but only strive to refine. 

Below are some practical tips that can radically sharpen your public speaking skills. 

> Whether you’re prepping for a talk, a webinar, or even a casual presentation, these gems might just transform how you approach your next speaking opportunity.

Reviewer 3: I suggest "preparing" instead of "prepping" here.

Author: Great suggestion! 💯

Author: Thank you!

> Whether you’re prepping for a talk, a webinar, or even a casual presentation, these gems might just transform how you approach your next speaking opportunity.

Author: ```suggestion
Whether you’re preparing for a talk, a webinar, or even a casual presentation, these gems might just transform how you approach your next speaking opportunity.
```

## Resonance and Relevance
At the core of every talk are two primary goals: to connect emotionally (resonance) and to deliver intellectually (relevance). 

> Striking the right balance ensures you’re not just heard, but truly remembered.

Reviewer 3: I see your point. I think it can be even better if we avoid the word "balance" here and throughout the chapter. 

In my view, the word "balance" implies: 

1. Binary thinking where there are only two factors at play; 
2. That to have more of one, you necessarily lose an equal amount of the other; 
3. Subtly constrains our imagination and prevents win-win solutions. 

Therefore, I suggest this sentence be re-worded to "Managing both goals so that you're not just hard, but truly remembered". 

Same suggestion applies to other uses of "balance" in the text.

Author: Thanks for taking the time to provide this detailed explanation. I do understand and appreciate your perspective.

In this context, I chose the word "balance" to convey the idea of harmoniously integrating both emotional connection and intellectual delivery in public speaking. My intention is to emphasise the importance of both elements **working together** to create a memorable experience for the audience.

I hope this clarifies my decision to retain it in the text.

Ask yourself:

**Resonance:** How does my talk appeal to the audience’s emotions?

- Speak to the **heart**. Relate to your audience on an emotional level.

**Relevance:** Is my content practical and suited to their needs?

- Speak to the **head**. Share information that’s meaningful, accurate, and on point.

Balance these two, and you’ll have your audience engaged from start to finish.

## Finding the Right Pace
Ever noticed how a pendulum swings? Left, right, left, right — it’s rhythmic but predictable. 
As speakers, we risk losing our audience if we’re too slow or overwhelming them if we’re too fast.

Pacing can be an art:

- **Go slow** at strategic moments to let your audience process key ideas.
- **Pick up the pace** when covering familiar or less critical details.
- **Modulate** — don’t stick to one rhythm. Alternate rhythms to keep things lively — don’t settle into a monotone “pendulum swing.”

Bonus tip: Use pauses strategically. 
They’re like a mental exhale for your audience.

> 

Reviewer 3: I suggest another bonus tip: 

If you use slides (which are NOT necessarily for effective public speaking!), blank slides can act as visual pauses, too!

Author: > visual pauses

This is new to me, and I really like it. ❤️ ❤️

> 

Author: ```suggestion

If you use slides (which are NOT _required_ for effective public speaking!), blank slides can act as visual pauses, too!
```

## Passion is Contagious
Enthusiasm and confidence are infectious. 
So, if you show genuine excitement about your topic, your audience will mirror it.

> Imagine yourself as an audience member: *How would you expect a confident speaker to act?*

Reviewer 3: Also, what have you seen in effective public speaking by others that show enthusiasm and confidence? Learn from them.

Author: Nice one! Thanks, Pen!

> Imagine yourself as an audience member: *How would you expect a confident speaker to act?*

Author: ```suggestion
Imagine yourself as an audience member: *How would you expect a confident speaker to act?*

Also, reflect on your experiences with effective public speaking. What characteristics and behaviors did those speakers exhibit that demonstrated enthusiasm and confidence? Learn from them.
```

Bottom line? Own the stage, and don’t be afraid to enjoy the experience.

## The Power of Rhetorical Questions
Want your audience to think deeply? Ask rhetorical questions.

A well-placed rhetorical question not only grabs attention but also invites the audience to ponder, think critically.

Bonus tip: Follow it up with a quick one-liner that subtly leads the audience toward the point you’re making.

For instance: “Wouldn’t it be great if coffee was free for a day? (*pause*) Yeah, I thought so too.”

## Storytelling: The Secret Weapon/More Than Words
Stories aren’t just for entertainment — they’re a bridge to connect with your audience on a personal level.

Personal experiences, when shared within appropriate boundaries, create a sense of familiarity and even intimacy. 

> Using metaphors or idioms adds color and paints vivid mental pictures that keep listeners invested and engaged.

Reviewer 3: Also, if you are introducing something new to the audience, understand what they're familar with and think of analogies that link what they are familiar with to the new thing you're showing.

Author: Analogies. 😍

## Keep Them Guessing
Embrace the element of surprise. Add something unexpected to your talk — an unconventional approach, a surprising fact, or a playful twist. 
It keeps the audience on their toes and leaves a lasting impression.

## Emphasise new ideas.
Remember: your audience is hearing your material for the first time. 
Don’t gloss over fresh or complex ideas — slow down, articulate clearly, and make them count.

In short, *take your time explaining new ideas so they can fully absorb them*.

## It’s Okay to Say “I Don’t Know”
When faced with a tough question, honesty is key. 
Acknowledge the person for asking, repeat the question if necessary, and take a moment to process. 
It’s okay to admit you don’t know the answer — it builds trust and shows humility and authenticity.

Bonus tip: Repeating the question back to the audience not only buys time but also makes the asker feel heard and valued.

## Lead the Slides; Don’t Let Them Lead You
Your slides are there to support *you*, not the other way around.

Speak before transitioning slides to keep the audience focused on you, not just your visuals. 
Advancing the slides too soon tempts them to read ahead of you.

> 

Reviewer 3: Useful rule of thumb: Have *just* enough on the slides to support what you say, no more. Don't be afraid to aggressively cut things out of slides. Remember, the audience is *listening* to you, not reading a document off the screen!

Author: Oh, I love this part about aggressively cutting things out of slides! Lifesaving skill. 😄

> 

Author: ```suggestion
## Acknowledgements

These tips are the result of coaching sessions with [David Kershaw](https://www.davidkershaw.net/), a professional public speaking coach.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: I also suggest you acknowledge where you got these tips from and how?

Reviewer 3: Maybe as an acknowledgements section?

Author: Definitely, yes! I had an acknowledgement section prepared, but needed to check with Anne that it was okay to include it.

Author: Added! Thank you!

## Keep Them Guessing
Embrace the element of surprise. Add something unexpected to your talk — an unconventional approach, a surprising fact, or a playful twist. 
It keeps the audience on their toes and leaves a lasting impression.

## Emphasise new ideas.
Remember: your audience is hearing your material for the first time. 
Don’t gloss over fresh or complex ideas — slow down, articulate clearly, and make them count.

In short, *take your time explaining new ideas so they can fully absorb them*.

## It’s Okay to Say “I Don’t Know”
When faced with a tough question, honesty is key. 
Acknowledge the person for asking, repeat the question if necessary, and take a moment to process. 
It’s okay to admit you don’t know the answer — it builds trust and shows humility and authenticity.

Bonus tip: Repeating the question back to the audience not only buys time but also makes the asker feel heard and valued.

## Lead the Slides; Don’t Let Them Lead You
Your slides are there to support *you*, not the other way around.

Speak before transitioning slides to keep the audience focused on you, not just your visuals. 
Advancing the slides too soon tempts them to read ahead of you.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Useful rule of thumb: Have just enough on the slides to support what you say, no more. Don't be afraid to aggressively cut things out of slides. Remember, the audience is listening to you, not reading a document off the screen!
```

Bonus tip: Follow it up with a quick one-liner that subtly leads the audience toward the point you’re making.

For instance: “Wouldn’t it be great if coffee was free for a day? (*pause*) Yeah, I thought so too.”

## Storytelling: The Secret Weapon/More Than Words
Stories aren’t just for entertainment — they’re a bridge to connect with your audience on a personal level.

Personal experiences, when shared within appropriate boundaries, create a sense of familiarity and even intimacy. 
Using metaphors or idioms adds color and paints vivid mental pictures that keep listeners invested and engaged.

## Keep Them Guessing
Embrace the element of surprise. Add something unexpected to your talk — an unconventional approach, a surprising fact, or a playful twist. 
It keeps the audience on their toes and leaves a lasting impression.

## Emphasise new ideas.
Remember: your audience is hearing your material for the first time. 
Don’t gloss over fresh or complex ideas — slow down, articulate clearly, and make them count.

In short, *take your time explaining new ideas so they can fully absorb them*.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Moreso, if you are introducing something new to the audience, understand what they're familar with and use analogies that connect the new information to their existing knowledge.

```
